Title: FllumaOne: A Code-Native Multimodal CAD Dataset with Executable Programs and Kernel-Validated Feature Histories

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.17696v1

Published Time: Wed, 17 Jun 2026 00:47:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# FllumaOne: A Code-Native Multimodal CAD Dataset with Executable Programs and Kernel-Validated Feature Histories 

Jizong Zhan ∗

June 2026 

Abstract 

Parametric computer-aided design records both final geometry and the ordered construction history that determines how a part can be edited. Datasets for ed-itable CAD research should therefore expose modeling operations, parameters, and feature dependencies together with validated geometry. We introduce FllumaOne, a code-native multimodal CAD dataset whose models are generated by executable Python programs in Flluma, a Qt/C++ OpenCASCADE-based CAD system. Each sample aligns its program with a structured feature tree, a training-oriented inter-mediate representation, STEP geometry, a surface point cloud, natural-language descriptions, metadata, and eight canonical visible-edge renderings. The primary release, FllumaOne-100K, contains 100,000 accepted samples across four template-level complexity regimes. Programs are executed and retained only after kernel geometry, solid validity, and export checks; release reports also record modality completeness and split-level duplicate tests. A Qwen2.5-Coder-1.5B LoRA baseline trained on 80,000 samples achieves 99.98% Python syntax validity, 99.97% Flluma build success, and 99.14% STEP-export validity on the held-out 10,000-sample test split. For the 9,909 predictions converted to surface point clouds, the mean normalized Chamfer Distance is 0.002124. The dataset supports conditioned CAD reconstruction, executable program synthesis, feature-tree prediction, B-Rep analysis, retrieval, design completion, and editable reverse engineering. 

Keywords: Computer-aided design, CAD dataset, executable CAD program, construc-tion history, feature tree, multimodal CAD, B-Rep geometry 

## 1 Introduction 

An editable CAD model is not defined by its final shape alone. Its engineering value also lies in the construction history: the sketches, features, parameters, and dependencies that determine how the part can be modified. A mesh or final B-Rep may reproduce the boundary accurately while omitting this information. That omission limits design reuse, variant creation, manufacturing-feature analysis, and reverse engineering, where the required output is a model that can be edited rather than only viewed [1]. 

> ∗

jizongzh@gmail.com 

1

> arXiv:2606.17696v1 [cs.AI] 16 Jun 2026

Large geometry repositories have supported substantial progress in shape learning and B-Rep processing [2, 3]. Construction-aware datasets subsequently introduced command sequences, sketch graphs, and human-authored modeling histories [4–6]. More recent datasets connect these representations to language, images, point samples, native CAD files, or executable scripts [7–9]. The remaining practical challenge is to combine an inspectable construction record, replayable code, kernel-validated geometry, and aligned learning inputs without requiring a commercial CAD license. We introduce FllumaOne, a code-native multimodal CAD dataset for learning editable construction structure. Each sample has a canonical feature tree and a paired Python program executed by Flluma, a Qt/C++ CAD system built on OpenCASCADE. The release also provides a compact training IR and derived geometric, visual, and textual observations. Keeping the construction record and replayable program together permits failures to be examined at the code, feature-history, kernel, and export levels. The 100,000 samples are generated from a controlled library of parametric construction procedures and accepted only after geometric validation and export checks. A separate local LLM stage produces captions, comprehensive descriptions, and prompt variants from kernel-derived records without selecting parameters or altering geometry, keeping geometric generation deterministic. The main contributions are: 

• Paired construction representations. A canonical feature tree, executable Python program, and compact training IR describe the same editable modeling history at complementary levels of abstraction. 

• Kernel-grounded multimodal release. The construction record is aligned with STEP geometry, surface point clouds, canonical views, text, and validation metadata for 100,000 accepted samples. 

• Auditable generation and integrity checks. The release reports geometry and export validation, split membership, modality completeness, and exact-duplicate checks over programs, construction records, IR, and solid signatures. 

• Executable baseline and evaluation tools. A reproducible text-to-program baseline is evaluated from Python syntax through Flluma execution, solid validation, STEP export, and normalized surface Chamfer Distance. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 From Shape Collections to CAD Boundary Representations 

ModelNet, ShapeNet, and Thingi10K established large-scale learning from voxels, meshes, and object collections [2, 10, 11]. Their strength is geometric and semantic coverage rather than editable modeling structure. Asset-oriented resources such as Objaverse++ and 3DCOMPAT++ extend visual, material, and multimodal annotations, but retain the final object as the principal representation [12, 13]. CAD research requires more exact geometry. ABC made analytic B-Rep curves and surfaces available at million-model scale, enabling patch, topology, and differential-geometry learning [3]. UV-Net demonstrated the value of operating directly on B-Rep 2faces and edges, while SolidGen, BrepGen, and BrepDiff treat boundary entities as gener-ative targets [14–17]. Operation annotations add partial construction semantics: CC3D-Ops assigns operation and step labels to B-Rep faces, and eCAD-Net recovers editable sketch–extrude sequences from final B-Reps [18, 19]. These resources establish strong supervision for final geometry and topology; construction history remains a separate rep-resentation problem. 

2.2 Construction Histories and Constraints 

Fusion 360 Gallery introduced human-authored construction sequences and an execution environment for sequential reconstruction [5]. DeepCAD showed that substantially larger command-sequence collections can support generative modeling, albeit within a compact sketch–extrude language [6]. SketchGraphs approaches design intent from the sketch side, representing geometric constraints as graphs over millions of 2D sketches [4]. These datasets established three complementary ingredients of editable CAD data: authentic histories, scalable sequence representations, and explicit geometric relations. Conditioned CAD generation has since expanded the inputs and operations under study. Text2CAD aligns natural-language prompts with construction sequences, Draw-ing2CAD predicts sequences from vector drawings, and RLCAD studies reinforcement learning for command generation [20–22]. HistCAD combines executable histories with explicit sketch constraints and native CAD compatibility, placing parameter editability and constraint preservation at the center of evaluation [8]. This line of work makes clear that single-pass geometric validity and editability are related but distinct properties. 

2.3 Executable CAD Programs 

Executable scripts provide a representation that code models can generate and engineers can inspect. CAD-Recode maps point clouds to CadQuery programs and uses large procedurally generated training data [23]. Zero-to-CAD embeds code generation in an execution-and-repair loop and broadens the operation vocabulary beyond sketch and ex-trusion [24]. CAD-Coder and FutureCAD further combine language-model generation with geometric feedback or B-Rep grounding [25, 26]. The principal trade-off is that scale and executability are obtained through a chosen scripting API and generation procedure, whose conventions become part of the learned distribution. Other work conditions construction on images, text, or cross-modal retrieval. GenCAD and DiffCAD study image-conditioned generation or alignment, while CAD-GPT and CADFusion integrate language, spatial reasoning, and visual feedback [27–30]. Executable program data are therefore increasingly evaluated not only as code corpora but as a bridge between observations and editable geometry. 

2.4 Multimodal CAD Datasets 

Recent datasets package construction data with several observation modalities. CADIn-struct adds language supervision to CAD programs, and Omni-CAD aligns command sequences with text, images, and point data [7, 31]. HistCAD couples constrained his-tories with STEP, views, native files, and text; SldprtNet derives aligned representations from SolidWorks parts; and CADFS reconstructs executable FeatureScript programs with multimodal annotations [8, 9, 32]. 3FllumaOne occupies a different point in this design space. Its canonical record is a structured feature tree paired with an executable Python view in an OpenCASCADE-based runtime. Standard geometry and learning observations are derived from the ac-cepted construction and linked through release manifests and hashes. The approach favors an accessible executable interface and auditability across representations, while inheriting the distributional limits of a controlled procedural generator. 

## 3 Dataset Overview 

3.1 Design Goals 

The release design balances three engineering requirements. First, the canonical repre-sentation must preserve operation order, parameters, and dependencies, while remaining convertible to code that can be inspected and replayed. Second, every accepted record must resolve to kernel-valid geometry and a standard exchange file; a plausible sequence without a stable solid is insufficient. Third, the representation must remain regular enough for machine learning. The Flluma API therefore uses explicit operation names, typed ar-guments, stable argument order, and direct binding of intermediate objects. These choices trade unrestricted modeling freedom for scale and alignment. The fea-ture tree, Python view, and training IR describe the same construction at different levels of detail, while derived observations are generated only after acceptance. The result is easier to audit and tokenize than arbitrary user scripts, but it necessarily reflects the operation vocabulary and procedural conventions of the generator. 

3.2 Sample Structure 

Each accepted sample contains a coherent set of source, derived, supervision, and prove-nance files, as summarized in Table 1. The canonical feature_tree.json records the ordered modeling operations, semantic roles, parameters, dependencies, and topology ref-erences, providing construction-history supervision related to that used in Fusion 360 Gallery, DeepCAD, HistCAD, and SldprtNet [5, 6, 8, 32]. The paired Python program is the replayable code view of this record and constructs the CAD model in Flluma. The feature tree can likewise be replayed in the Flluma runtime and converted back into executable Python code for model reconstruction. The training IR serializes the same construction history into a compact sequence-learning target. Geometry is exported as STEP, while point clouds and canonical views provide geometric and visual supervision. The visual data consist of eight feature-aware visible-edge renderings under images/canonical/ . These views are generated from fixed orthographic and isometric viewpoints and are intended to preserve construction-relevant visible edges rather than photorealistic appearance. Text files provide deterministic de-scriptions and LLM-enriched prompts, while metadata and release reports record hashes, quality checks, schema version, and generation provenance. At release level, FllumaOne is distributed as raw sample folders together with JSON release manifests, split files, schema descriptions, vocabulary files, and Parquet training tables, so users can inspect individual CAD records or load train/validation/test splits directly. 4Table 1: Main per-sample and release-level files in FllumaOne. 

File or directory Purpose 

program.py Executable Python CAD program used to generate and replay the model. 

feature_tree.json Structured construction history with operations, parameters, semantic types, dependencies, and selectors. 

training_ir.txt Compact training-oriented IR serialized from the feature tree for sequence-learning targets. 

model.step Kernel-exported STEP geometry for standard CAD exchange and downstream B-Rep processing. 

point_cloud.npz Surface point cloud with normals and face identifiers. 

images/canonical/ Eight feature-aware visible-edge views from fixed orthographic and isometric directions. 

text/descriptions.json Template-generated textual descriptions and structured CAD facts. 

text/llm_descriptions.jsonl Per-sample LLM-enriched captions, technical descriptions, and user prompt variants. 

metadata.json Provenance, hashes, validation summaries, export status, and sample-level statistics. 

dataset_manifest.json Release-level manifest with split membership, sample paths, modality inventory, and integrity summaries. 

quality_report.json Release-level quality report covering modality completeness, duplicate checks, and operation coverage. 

scheduler_report.json Scheduler report describing template allocation, complexity levels, and generation statistics. 

splits/ Text files listing the official train, validation, and test sample identifiers. 

schema/ and vocab/ Schema descriptions and token vocabularies for the released training representations. 

parquet/train.parquet Training split table for direct machine-learning data loading. 

parquet/val.parquet Validation split table. 

parquet/test.parquet Test split table. 

5Program (Flluma Python) 

program.py Feature Trees Training IR 

training_ir.txt 

STEP / B-Rep 

model.step 

Deterministic Text 

text/descriptions.json 

Surface Point Cloud 

2048 points with stored normals 

LLM Descriptions 

text/llm_descriptions.jsonl 

Eight Canonical Views 

6 orthographic + 2 isometric 

params = Parameters() params.add('depth', 57.9, min=20.0, max=90.0, semantic_type='primitive_width') params.add('height', 26.8, min=10.0, max=60.0, semantic_type='overall_height') params.add('hole_radius', 1.31, min=0.6, max=4.0, semantic_type='hole_radius') params.add('tab_height', 6.27, min=3.0, max=12.0, expression= ... params.add('tab_length', 20.21, min=8.0, max=34.0, expression= ... params.add('tab_width', 9.21, min=4.0, max=18.0, expression= ... params.add('wall', 0.93, min=0.4, max=2.0, semantic_type='shell_thickness') params.add('width', 57.9, min=24.0, max=120.0, semantic_type='overall_width') ... feature_tree.json feature_tree_model.json 

PART flluma_0008012 CAT shelled_enclosure_history ... PARAM depth 57.9 MIN 20 MAX 90 SEM primitive_width PARAM height 26.8 MIN 10 MAX 60 SEM overall_height PARAM hole_radius 1.31 MIN 0.6 MAX 4 SEM hole_radius PARAM tab_height 6.27 MIN 3 MAX 12 EXPR ... PARAM tab_length 20.21 MIN 8 MAX 34 EXPR width*0.349 SEM ... PARAM tab_width 9.21 MIN 4 MAX 18 EXPR depth*0.159 SEM ... PARAM wall 0.93 MIN 0.4 MAX 2 SEM shell_thickness ... 

Caption variants • Editable semantic CAD model of a shelled enclosure history ... ... Construction steps • Create a box with length 57.9 mm, width 57.9 mm, and height 26.8 mm • Hollow the solid with wall thickness 0.93 mm. ... Facts + instruction variants + keywords + prompt variants + ... 

Short caption Editable CAD model of a shelled enclosure with mounting holes and flanges, approx. 59.8 x 75.6 x 27.7 mm. User prompt variants 

• Design an editable shelled enclosure with mounting holes and flanges using approximate dimensions of 59.8 by 75.6 by 27.7 mm. • Create a parametric model for a shelled enclosure that can be edited, including two through holes and two flanges. 

Comprehensive description • This part is an editable CAD model representing a shelled enclosure history with mounting functionality. It has a bounding box dimension of approximately ...      

> Outer Box Shell Join Front Join Rear Hole Pattern
> Tab Box Place Front Place Rear

+X -X +Y -Y +Z -Z Iso 1 Iso 2 Figure 1: Aligned representations of the released sample flluma 0008012 . The executable Python program, canonical and model-facing feature trees, training IR, STEP B-Rep, 2,048-point surface point cloud with stored normals, deterministic descriptions, LLM-enriched descriptions, and eight canonical views are derived from the same kernel-validated construction record. Textual panels show shortened excerpts; the visual set contains six orthographic and two isometric views. 

3.3 Visual Modality 

The primary visual modality is the canonical eight-view set: six axis-aligned orthographic views and two isometric views. Rather than imitating product photographs, the renderer preserves visible feature boundaries so that holes, pockets, bosses, patterns, and local construction details remain observable from fixed viewpoints. Pure silhouette projections would conceal many internal or back-facing construction cues. Figure 1 shows how these views are stored alongside the other representations of one released sample. The panels are not independently collected annotations: the program, construction representations, geometry, point samples, images, and text all refer to the same accepted CAD record. This correspondence allows a model prediction in one repre-sentation to be checked against the executable source and kernel-generated geometry in the others. 

3.4 Scale and Complexity Allocation 

The primary release contains 100,000 valid CAD samples. Its scheduler assigns fixed tar-gets to four complexity levels (Table 2) so that basic primitives remain represented without allowing them to dominate the corpus, a known risk in command-sequence datasets [6, 23]. The levels are template-level design annotations: each of the 53 template families is as-6L1: flluma_0099787 

> cover plate shell
> features=1, depth=1, faces=15
> L1: flluma_0003571
> prism stock
> features=1, depth=1, faces=12
> L2: flluma_0074209
> sensor mount plate
> features=1, depth=1, faces=15
> L2: flluma_0057925
> face recursive mount
> features=7, depth=7, faces=29
> L3: flluma_0078930
> crescent lug profile
> features=4, depth=4, faces=14
> L3: flluma_0020263
> lobed gasket profile
> features=4, depth=4, faces=61
> L4: flluma_0042902
> revolved hub mount
> features=6, depth=5, faces=17
> L4: flluma_0000179
> lofted transition bracket
> features=8, depth=5, faces=69

Figure 2: Representative samples from the four complexity levels in FllumaOne-100K. Each level is illustrated with two canonical isometric views together with the sample identifier, template family, feature count, feature-tree depth, and B-Rep face count. signed one level before generation, and every sample inherits the level of its source tem-plate. Feature count, history depth, and topology statistics are measured after generation and are not used as post-hoc level thresholds. L1 covers primitive and low-operation templates used for syntax and geometry ground-ing. L2 contains basic parametric feature combinations. L3 combines multiple editable features and moderately involved histories. L4 contains templates designed around richer construction sequences, compound feature interactions, and more involved mechanical parts. The labels organize the generator’s construction regimes; they are not proposed as a universal geometric complexity scale. Representative samples are shown in Figure 2. Table 2: Target and realized complexity allocation for the FllumaOne-100K release. 

Allocation L1 L2 L3 L4 

Target count 3,000 17,000 55,000 25,000 Target ratio 3% 17% 55% 25% Accepted count 3,056 16,966 55,219 24,759 

The accepted proportions remain within 0.25 percentage points of their targets. 

3.5 Supported Learning Tasks 

The aligned structure of FllumaOne enables several learning tasks in editable CAD recon-struction, multimodal CAD generation, and retrieval. These tasks are related to recent work on text-to-CAD generation, multimodal CAD synthesis, CAD program generation, and B-Rep learning [7, 14, 20, 23, 25, 29, 31]. Since each sample contains executable code, structured construction history, validated geometry, visual views, point clouds, and text, the dataset can be used from both generative and analytical perspectives. 7• Text-to-CAD and CAD program synthesis: Models can map natural-language prompts, technical descriptions, or retrieval captions to executable Python CAD programs, feature trees, or training-oriented IRs. The prediction target is editable construction logic rather than only final geometry [7, 20, 25]. 

• Image-to-CAD reconstruction: The canonical visible-edge views provide visual conditioning for reconstructing feature trees, training IRs, or executable CAD pro-grams from fixed CAD views [27–29, 31]. 

• Point-cloud-to-CAD and editable reverse engineering: Surface point clouds can be used as input for recovering structured construction histories, typed param-eters, or programmatic CAD representations [19, 23]. 

• Feature-tree prediction and design auto-completion: The ordered feature trees and training IRs support prediction of operations, parameters, dependencies, semantic roles, and next-step modeling actions from partial construction histories [5, 6, 8, 32]. 

• Cross-modal CAD retrieval: Text descriptions, rendered views, point clouds, STEP geometry, feature trees, and programs can be embedded into a shared re-trieval space, enabling retrieval of editable CAD models from language, images, or geometry [14, 30, 31]. 

• B-Rep feature extraction and manufacturing-oriented analysis: Since each sample includes STEP geometry aligned with feature trees and executable programs, the dataset can support research on extracting operation-level or machining-relevant structure from B-Rep geometry, including holes, pockets, bosses, chamfers, fillets, and repeated feature patterns [14, 33, 34]. Beyond benchmark construction, these tasks correspond to practical CAD workflows. In editable reverse engineering, a scan-derived point cloud can be mapped back to a feature history that a designer can modify rather than to a static mesh. In manufacturing-oriented analysis, the aligned feature tree and STEP B-Rep can help associate geometric features such as holes, pockets, bosses, chamfers, and fillets with downstream process-planning decisions and operation sequencing. 

## 4 The FllumaOne Pipeline 

Figure 3 summarizes the generation and release pipeline. The pipeline starts from a scheduled template distribution, generates executable CAD programs and feature trees, filters candidates using design signatures and kernel validation, and then packages ac-cepted samples with geometry, visual views, text, metadata, release reports, split files, and Parquet training tables. 

4.1 Flluma Execution Environment 

Flluma is a parametric CAD application and execution environment developed to con-struct, execute, validate, and inspect the code-native samples within FllumaOne. 1 It has 

> 1The Flluma software ecosystem, including the interactive GUI, headless CLI, and Python CAD API wrappers, is publicly available free of charge for academic research, dataset validation, and program

8Production scheduler /      

> level targets and template weights
> (1) Generation
> Parametric template selection
> Python CAD program generation
> Feature tree and
> training IR construction
> (2) Deduplication and kernel validation
> Canonical construction signature
> Seen construction
> signature?
> Reject candidate
> and retry
> FllumaCLI program
> execution
> no
> yes
> OpenCASCADE B-Rep
> construction and validation
> Valid geometry
> and exports?
> (3) Release construction
> Accepted CAD
> sample
> fail
> pass
> Program, feature tree,
> training IR
> STEP geometry,
> point cloud
> Canonical 8 views,
> drawing-style 4 views
> Release packaging
> Raw folders,
> JSO NL repo rts ,
> Parquet tables
> Deterministic text descriptions
> Local language enrichment
> llm_descriptions.jsonl
> captions and prompts

Figure 3: Overview of the FllumaOne data generation and release pipeline. Parametric CAD programs are generated from scheduled templates, deduplicated using canonical construction signatures, executed and validated in the Flluma kernel environment, and then packaged with geometry, visual, textual, and tabular release assets. a Qt/C++ application layer, a Python-facing CAD API, and an OpenCASCADE-based B-Rep geometry backend. The same system is used in two modes. The graphical interface is used for visual inspection, debugging, and manual checks during development, while 

FllumaCLI is used for headless batch generation. In the automated pipeline, FllumaCLI executes each generated Python program, re-solves the geometry through the CAD kernel, validates the resulting solid, and produces the release assets. Because the executable program is retained, a sample can be replayed and checked against its exported geometry and construction record rather than inspected only as a STEP file. The kernel-level validation chain is deliberately explicit. Modeling operations are resolved to OpenCASCADE B-Reps. Boolean joins, cuts, and intersections use OCC Boolean operators from the BRepAlgoAPI family. The resulting shape is checked with the OCC B-Rep check analyzer, including face-, edge-, and vertex-level validity; volume and surface-area facts are computed with BRepGProp ; and STEP export/reload checks use 

STEPControl writer and reader APIs. This makes the validation target a kernel-accepted B-Rep solid, not only a syntactically valid Python script. Unlike a general-purpose scripting interface, the Flluma runtime is used here as part of a fixed release pipeline. CadQuery and FreeCAD accept broader user programs; the present pipeline favors a regular operation schema, explicit dependencies, and determin-istic export so that one accepted construction can be traced across its released represen-tations. 

execution at https://www.flluma.com .

94.2 Program and Feature-Tree Generation 

Each sample is generated by a Python CAD program executed in the Flluma runtime. Treating CAD as executable code follows the direction of CAD-Recode, CAD-Coder, FutureCAD, and CADFS, where program synthesis is used to make generated designs inspectable and editable [9, 23, 25, 26]. The programs call typed CAD operations for plate creation, sketch construction, extrusion, cylinders, boxes, Boolean joins and cuts, hole patterns, rectangular pockets, fillets, chamfers, linear and circular patterns, lofts, sweeps, shells, and face-based features. The Python-facing Flluma API is designed as a regularized CAD programming inter-face for learning. Its commands use explicit operation names, typed parameters, stable argument order, and direct variable binding for intermediate solids, sketches, and feature operations. In practice, this keeps the program text close to the corresponding construc-tion history: a line of code usually introduces one modeling step, one parameterized operation, or one explicit dependency. The goal is not to replace general CAD scripting tools, but to provide a dataset representation whose source code is regular enough for machine learning while remaining executable and editable. For each accepted model, the pipeline stores both the executable program and a struc-tured feature tree. The program is the human-readable construction source, while the feature tree records ordered operations, parameters, semantic roles, and dependencies in a machine-readable form. These two views are aligned during generation: the feature tree can be replayed in the Flluma runtime, and it can also be converted back into executable Python code for model reconstruction. A compact training IR is then derived from the feature tree for sequence-learning targets. 

4.3 Template Scheduling and Complexity Control 

The generator uses a controlled library of parametric templates. Some templates are simple primitives or low-operation examples, while others contain longer editable histo-ries with dependent operations. Template- and grammar-based generation is common in synthetic CAD datasets, but narrow operation vocabularies and conservative param-eter ranges can make the resulting data visually repetitive [6, 23, 24]. We therefore use a mixture of simple and history-rich templates rather than relying on one construction pattern. The current library includes primitive stocks, sketch-profile plates, circular flange pat-terns, motor brackets with cutouts, shelled enclosures, intersected mounting blocks, swept pipe brackets, revolved hub components, lofted transition brackets, face-feature service covers, ribbed heat-sink mounts, and irregular sketch-profile parts. Across these tem-plates, the generator varies parameter values, feature counts, operation order, and se-mantic roles. The scheduler assigns candidates according to the L1–L4 allocation de-scribed in Section 3.4, so that elementary examples are present but most of the release is concentrated in moderate and rich construction histories. 

4.4 Deduplication and Kernel-in-the-Loop Validation 

Generated programs are not accepted only because they are syntactically valid. Before kernel execution, candidates are checked against canonical construction signatures to re-duce exact repetition in construction history. Candidates with previously seen design signatures are rejected and regenerated with different seeds or parameters. 10 Candidates that pass the signature check are executed in Flluma and evaluated by the OpenCASCADE-based geometry backend. A candidate is accepted only when the resulting model passes solid validation and the required exports can be produced. This matters because executable CAD programs can fail geometrically even when the code itself is valid, for example through invalid Boolean results, degenerate faces, non-manifold geometry, or unstable topology [24–26]. For accepted samples, the pipeline records val-idation status, export status, source hashes, geometry hashes, and release-level quality summaries. Failed candidates are discarded or retried, and long generation runs use an atomic and resumable protocol so that previously accepted samples can be retained after interruption. The final manifest records 100,000 evaluated release slots, 77 retries caused by du-plicate construction signatures, and no unrecovered generation failures. Transient kernel failures were handled during generation, but their reason categories were not retained as release-level counters; the reported statistics therefore describe accepted outputs and recovered duplicate retries rather than a retrospective failure taxonomy. 

4.5 Multimodal Export 

Accepted samples are exported into several aligned modalities. Geometry is serialized as STEP for standard CAD exchange, and point clouds are sampled from the validated geom-etry. The visual export produces the canonical eight-view visible-edge set, which exposes local construction-relevant edges from fixed orthographic and isometric viewpoints. Text supervision is produced in two stages. First, deterministic descriptions are generated from validated sample metadata and written to text/descriptions.json .These descriptions include the part category, dimensions, operation counts, construc-tion steps, and B-Rep facts. Second, a local LLM enrichment stage rewrites these structured descriptions into more natural Text-to-CAD language. The enrichment stage uses a local Qwen2.5-7B model [35], conditioned on descriptions.json and the paired 

training_ir.txt . The prompt asks for CAD-oriented language while preserving nu-meric dimensions, operation counts, hole and pattern counts, and bounding-box facts. The resulting text/llm_descriptions.jsonl file stores a compact retrieval caption, a detailed technical description, and three natural user prompt variants. The LLM stage does not choose CAD parameters, change geometry, repair failed programs, or participate in validation. 

4.6 Release Packaging and Quality Reporting 

After sample generation and validation, the release pipeline writes both raw sample folders and machine-learning tables. Raw folders contain the executable program, feature tree, training IR, STEP file, point cloud, visual views, text files, and metadata. Release-level JSON reports index these folders and record split membership, hashes, template labels, operation tokens, modality completeness, and quality information. The same accepted samples are exported into Parquet train, validation, and test tables for direct machine-learning use. This layout supports two common workflows. A CAD researcher can open a single raw folder and inspect the program, feature tree, geometry, images, and metadata together. A machine-learning user can load the Parquet splits directly without traversing nested sample folders. Both views are derived from the same accepted samples, so a training row 11 Table 3: Release-level statistics for FllumaOne-100K.                     

> Statistic Value
> Total samples scanned 100,000 Complete samples 100,000 (100.00%) Train/validation/test split 80,000 / 10,000 / 10,000 Complexity allocation (L1/L2/L3/L4) 3,056 / 16,966 / 55,219 / 24,759 Template/category count 53 Operation-token vocabulary size 44 Feature-tree operation labels 60 Mean feature count 5.458 Mean history depth 4.348 Mean dependency-edge count 4.678 Mean parameter count 6.983 STEP files present 100,000 (100.00%) Point-cloud files present 100,000 (100.00%) Canonical rendered views 8 per sample, 100,000 complete sets Deterministic text descriptions 100,000 (100.00%) Exact duplicate program hashes 0Exact duplicate feature-tree hashes 0Exact duplicate training-IR hashes 0Exact duplicate solid signatures 0

can be traced back to its raw CAD record. The final release report records duplicate sample identifiers, duplicate program hashes, duplicate feature-tree hashes, duplicate training-IR hashes, duplicate solid-signature hashes, missing modalities, failed exports, and warning types. These checks separate failure modes that are easy to confuse in synthetic CAD generation: code that does not execute, code that executes but produces invalid geometry, valid geometry that cannot be exported reliably, derived views that are missing or inconsistent, and accepted samples that duplicate an existing construction record. 

## 5 Dataset Statistics 

This section reports the release-level statistics of FllumaOne-100K. The statistics are com-puted from the completed 100K release using internal release-analysis reports derived from the raw sample folders, Parquet splits, dataset_manifest.json , quality_report.json ,and scheduler_report.json . Following common practice in CAD dataset papers, we report sample count, split integrity, operation coverage, construction-history complexity, B-Rep topology, modality completeness, and duplicate statistics [3, 6–8, 32]. Figure 4 provides a distributional overview before the aggregate tables. It reports operation prevalence at the sample level rather than raw token frequency, together with feature-tree depth, B-Rep face-count, and template-family distributions. These views expose both the central construction regime and the long-tailed portions of the release that are less apparent from means and medians alone. 12 0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% 

Samples containing operation (%) 

> Hole Pattern
> Boolean Join
> Sketch
> Translate
> Box
> Plate
> Chamfer
> Extrude
> Rectangular Pocket
> Cylinder
> Fillet
> Loft
> Revolve
> Sweep Tube
> Face Extrude Cut

(a) Operation prevalence across samples       

> 1234567

Feature-tree depth 

> 0
> 5,000
> 10,000
> 15,000
> 20,000
> 25,000
> 30,000
> 35,000
> Number of samples

(b) Feature-tree depth distribution   

> 10 010 110 2

B-Rep face count (log scale) 

> 0
> 5,000
> 10,000
> 15,000
> 20,000
> 25,000
> Number of samples

(c) B-Rep face-count distribution      

> 0% 2% 4% 6% 8% 10%

Dataset share (%) 

> lofted transition
> bracket
> revolved hub mount
> swept pipe bracket
> face feature service
> cover
> lobed gasket profile
> rounded slot profile
> plate
> asymmetric tab profile
> plate
> cross tab profile
> mount
> stepped profile mount
> crescent lug profile
> trapezoid profile foot
> u channel profile
> bracket
> face recursive mount
> shelled enclosure
> history
> linear ribbed heat
> sink mount

(d) Top 15 template families Figure 4: Release-level distributions for FllumaOne-100K. (a) Percentage of samples con-taining each of the 15 most prevalent operation tokens. (b) Distribution of feature-tree depth. (c) Distribution of B-Rep face count using logarithmic bins and a logarithmic horizontal axis. (d) Dataset share of the 15 most frequent template families. 

5.1 Complexity Allocation 

The production scheduler targets a controlled distribution over four complexity levels. The realized allocation closely matches the intended 3%/17%/55%/25% ratio, with small de-viations caused by validation, retry, and template availability during generation. Table 4 reports the measured level counts and representative complexity statistics. L1 contains simple primitives or low-operation examples, while L3 and L4 contain the majority of the release and provide moderate-to-rich construction histories. 

5.2 Feature-History and Geometry Complexity 

In addition to aggregate sample count, FllumaOne is characterized by construction-history and B-Rep complexity. These statistics are important because a large CAD dataset can still be procedurally narrow if most examples share similar operation counts, dependency structures, or topological patterns. Prior CAD datasets and B-Rep learning papers report command-sequence lengths, topology statistics, sketch constraints, or feature histories to characterize structural difficulty [3, 4, 6, 8, 14]. The topology statistics show that the release is not limited to single primitive solids. 13 Table 4: Realized complexity allocation and per-level statistics.                          

> Level Count Share Mean features Mean depth Mean faces
> L1 3,056 3.1% 1.000 1.000 5.616 L2 16,966 17.0% 4.030 4.030 22.993 L3 55,219 55.2% 5.623 4.412 27.392 L4 24,759 24.8% 6.620 4.839 38.737

Table 5: Construction-history and geometry complexity statistics for FllumaOne-100K. 

Metric Mean Median Min Max 

Program length (lines) 17.442 17.000 7 26 Feature-tree nodes 8.245 7.000 2 16 Feature count 5.458 6.000 1 11 History depth 4.348 4.000 1 7Dependency edges 4.678 5.000 0 10 Parameters 6.983 7.000 1 13 Training-IR tokens 179.878 167.000 28 307 B-Rep faces 28.789 20.000 1 191 B-Rep edges 72.144 48.000 2 415 B-Rep vertices 46.567 32.000 1 227 Bounding-box aspect ratio 6.032 4.487 1.000 28.394 The mean B-Rep topology contains 28.789 faces and 72.144 edges, while the upper tail reaches 191 faces and 415 edges. The median feature count is 6 and the median history depth is 4, indicating that the central portion of the dataset contains editable multi-step construction histories rather than only isolated final shapes. Each accepted sample is exported as STEP using the OpenCASCADE STEP writer with the AP214 automotive-design schema. The aligned point cloud contains 2,048 float32 surface samples with float32 normals. Points are generated by the Flluma surface-UV sampler: sample counts are allocated across CAD faces in proportion to face area, with small-face preservation enabled and at least one point assigned to each face when feasible. Within each face, candidate points are drawn in the trimmed UV domain, filtered by the face classifier, and accepted according to the local surface Jacobian so that sampling better follows surface area than raw UV coordinates. Normals are computed from the cross product of the first derivatives of the underlying OpenCASCADE surface and adjusted for face orientation. The point-cloud export records this policy as sampling=surface_uv 

in sample metadata and release schema files. 

5.3 Operation and Template Diversity 

The release contains 53 template or category families and 44 operation tokens. The ten most frequent template families cover 47.4% of the dataset, and the largest family, 

lofted transition bracket , accounts for 8.0%. The template distribution has a nor-malized entropy of 0.915 and a Gini coefficient of 0.446. Normalized entropy equals 1 for a uniform distribution over the 53 families; the measured value shows that samples are spread across the catalog, although several recurring mechanical templates remain visibly concentrated. 14 Table 6: Diversity statistics for FllumaOne-100K. 

Statistic Value 

Template/category count 53 Operation-token vocabulary size 44 Feature-tree operation-label count 60 Most frequent template/category lofted transition bracket 

Most frequent template/category ratio 8.0% Top-10 template/category coverage 47.4% Template normalized entropy 0.915 Template Gini coefficient 0.446 Most frequent feature-tree label HolePattern 

Most frequent feature-tree label ratio 14.2% Feature-tree label normalized entropy 0.747 Feature-tree label Gini coefficient 0.734 Two related vocabularies are reported separately. In the 44-token model-facing oper-ation vocabulary, OP HOLE PATTERN appears in 88.1% of samples and accounts for 17.8% of operation-token instances. The ten most frequent tokens cover 82.2% of instances; loft, revolve, sweep, shell, circular pattern, threaded hole, and profile cut occupy the long tail. The feature-tree representation uses a finer 60-label vocabulary containing semantic and composite construction nodes. Under this counting scheme, HolePattern is the most frequent label at 14.2%, and the label distribution has a normalized entropy of 0.747 and a Gini coefficient of 0.734. The two percentages use different denominators. Their imbalance reflects the prevalence of mounting-hole and pattern operations in mechanical parts, so operation-level models should report macro-averaged or per-operation results in addition to micro-averaged accuracy. 

5.4 Modal Alignment and Integrity 

For each sample, hashes and schema checks verify consistency among the executable program, feature tree, training IR, metadata, STEP geometry, point cloud, deterministic text, and canonical rendered views. This integrity reporting is especially important for multimodal CAD releases, where missing views, inconsistent programs, or invalid B-Reps can affect multiple downstream tasks [3, 7, 8, 31, 32]. No exact duplicates were found under program, feature-tree, training-IR, metadata, geometry, solid-signature, or shape-signature hashes. This does not mean that no two samples are visually similar: samples from the same template family may share a global layout while differing in dimensions, local feature counts, operation parameters, topology, or construction history. For this reason, the release reports exact duplicate hashes as hard integrity checks, while template concentration and operation distributions are used to characterize dataset diversity. 

5.5 Text Supervision 

The present release scan includes deterministic descriptions as the main auditable text modality. These descriptions are complete for all 100,000 samples and are generated 15 Table 7: Release integrity metrics for FllumaOne-100K. 

Metric Value 

Complete samples 100,000 (100.00%) Incomplete or unstable samples 0STEP completeness 100,000 (100.00%) Point-cloud completeness 100,000 (100.00%) Canonical 8-view completeness 100,000 (100.00%) Deterministic-text completeness 100,000 (100.00%) Duplicate program hashes 0Duplicate feature-tree hashes 0Duplicate training-IR hashes 0Duplicate solid-signature hashes 0Duplicate-signature retries 77 Unrecovered generation failures 0Missing required files by type None Unstable or unreadable files by type None directly from validated metadata, construction histories, and B-Rep facts. Their mean length is approximately 9,817 characters, with a median of 10,011 characters. The final release also includes LLM-enriched records for all samples in text/llm_ descriptions.jsonl . We keep deterministic descriptions and LLM-enriched prompts conceptually separate. The deterministic text is used for reproducible dataset auditing, while the LLM-enriched captions, technical descriptions, and user-prompt variants provide an additional instruction-style supervision layer. Kernel-derived facts are therefore not mixed with generated paraphrases in the core integrity statistics. 

## 6 Benchmark Protocol and Baseline Study 

We define benchmark tasks over the released representations and report a text-to-program experiment on the official split. The experiment tests the complete path from a language description to executable code, kernel validation, STEP export, and geometric compari-son. 

6.1 Benchmark Tasks 

The task definitions admit standard sequence, image, point-cloud, and text encoders, allowing later work to compare model classes without changing the data contract. Table 8 specifies the input, target, and principal metric for each task. 

6.2 Text-to-Program Baseline 

To verify the code-native use of the dataset, we train a text-to-program baseline in which a model maps a natural-language CAD description to an executable program.py . In addition to recovering the modeling operations and parameters, the output must be syn-tactically valid Python, use the Flluma CAD API correctly, and execute to a valid solid model. The experiment therefore evaluates the main representation choice of FllumaOne: 16 Table 8: Proposed benchmark tasks for FllumaOne. 

Task Input / output Metrics 

Template classification Image, point cloud, or text to template family Accuracy, macro-F1 Complexity-level prediction Image, point cloud, or training IR to L1–L4 level Accuracy, macro-F1, confusion matrix Next-operation prediction Prefix of training IR to next operation token Top-1, top-5 accuracy Feature-tree reconstruction Image, point cloud, or text to feature-tree sequence Operation accuracy, parameter error, tree-edit distance CAD retrieval Text, image, or point cloud query to matching CAD sample Recall@K, median rank Program validity Generated program or IR to executable CAD model Syntax rate, kernel-valid rate, export-valid rate editable CAD supervision is provided as executable source code rather than only as final geometry or a latent command sequence. We fine-tune Qwen2.5-Coder-1.5B-Instruct [35] with LoRA on the official 80,000-sample training split. For each sample, a deterministic description from text/ descriptions.json or the LLM-generated comprehensive description in text/llm_ descriptions.jsonl is selected with equal probability using a fixed seed; the target is the paired program.py . Prompt tokens are masked from the causal language-model loss. The model is trained for one epoch with a maximum context length of 4096 tokens, learn-ing rate 2 × 10 −4, cosine scheduling, warmup ratio 0.03, LoRA rank 16, LoRA alpha 32, dropout 0.05, and an effective batch size of 8. Training uses FP16 with TF32 enabled and takes 27,318 seconds on one 16-GB NVIDIA RTX 5060 Ti. Greedy decoding is used at test time with at most 2,048 generated tokens. The held-out test set contains 10,000 samples and is never used for training. Release integrity checks report zero exact duplicate pro-gram, feature-tree, training-IR, and solid-signature hashes across the splits. The official split is sample-disjoint but not template-disjoint: template families occur in all splits, so this baseline measures interpolation within the released generator distribution rather than generalization to unseen template families. For reproducibility, the GitHub repository provides the data-preparation, LoRA training, generation, Python-level evaluation, and Flluma execution-evaluation scripts, together with the run-command configuration and lightweight result summaries including training_report.json , generation_report. json , evaluation_python_summary.json , and evaluation_flluma_summary.json .

6.3 Evaluation Metrics 

The text-to-program task is evaluated at code, execution, and geometry levels. Code-level checks test Python syntax and the required part object. Execution metrics record Flluma loading, model construction, solid validation, and STEP export. For geomet-ric comparison, the reference bounding box center is subtracted from both 2,048-point clouds, and both are divided by half of the reference box’s largest side length. The nor-malized reference therefore spans two units along its longest axis. Chamfer Distance 17 Table 9: Text-to-program LoRA baseline on the official 10,000-sample test split. 

Metric Value 

Training samples 80,000 Test samples 10,000 Train loss / validation-subset loss 0.0878 / 0.0766 Python syntax-valid rate 99.98% Required part definition rate 99.98% Flluma load rate 99.97% Flluma build rate 99.97% Kernel solid-valid rate 99.14% STEP-export-valid rate 99.14% Chamfer-evaluated samples 9,909 Mean / median Chamfer Distance 0.002124 / 0.001491 P90 / P95 Chamfer Distance 0.003502 / 0.004854 Maximum Chamfer Distance 0.180119 Mean source-code similarity 87.34% Operation precision / recall / F1 99.97% / 99.95% / 99.96% Operation LCS ratio 99.94% is the mean of the two directed mean squared nearest-neighbor distances. Source-code similarity uses Python’s difflib.SequenceMatcher ratio on the raw extracted program strings. Operation precision, recall, and F1 use multiset overlap between extracted part.* 

API call names; the operation LCS ratio separately measures their order relative to the reference sequence. These operation metrics do not evaluate argument values, and the precision/recall/F1 scores do not penalize call reordering, so they are interpreted alongside source similarity, execution, and Chamfer results. The validation loss in Table 9 is measured on a fixed 1,000-sample subset after the epoch. Its value is lower than the epoch-averaged training loss because training uses LoRA dropout and the reported training loss also includes earlier, less-fitted optimization steps. The validity, similarity, and geometry metrics are computed on the full 10,000-sample test split. Table 9 shows that the baseline produces executable programs for most held-out de-scriptions. Out of 10,000 test cases, 9,998 are syntactically valid Python programs and 9,997 can be loaded and built by the Flluma runtime. Of the built programs, 83 fail solid validation; the remaining 9,914 are solid-valid and all are exported successfully as STEP. Of these predictions, 9,909 are also converted to generated surface point clouds for geo-metric comparison. The mean and median normalized Chamfer Distances are 0.002124 and 0.001491, respectively, with a P95 value of 0.004854. The maximum value is 0.180119, showing that rare geometric outliers remain despite the low central values. The five-case gap between STEP validity and Chamfer coverage comes from models rejected by the stricter point-cloud export path. The two syntax-invalid programs and one additional load failure account for the earlier execution failures. The high operation F1 is expected under this benchmark design because the multiset metric compares names from a regular CAD API and does not score argument values or call order; order is measured separately by the LCS ratio, while parameter and geometry errors are reflected by source-code sim-ilarity, Flluma execution, solid validation, STEP export, and Chamfer Distance. These 18 Table 10: Baseline results grouped by the template-level complexity annotation. Chamfer statistics use the successfully sampled predictions in the CD n column.                                           

> Level Test nBuild STEP valid Code sim. Op. F1 CD nMean CD Median CD
> L1 321 100.00% 100.00% 83.13% 100.00% 320 0.002906 0.001668 L2 1,682 99.94% 99.05% 84.12% 99.93% 1,665 0.001570 0.001235 L3 5,513 99.98% 99.55% 86.83% 99.95% 5,485 0.002061 0.001292 L4 2,484 99.96% 98.19% 91.18% 100.00% 2,439 0.002541 0.002012

results establish a closed evaluation path from text to executable CAD code and kernel-checked geometry. They should be interpreted as reconstruction within a controlled API and shared template distribution, not as evidence of open-domain CAD generation or unseen-template generalization. Table 10 separates the test results using the level inherited from each sample’s tem-plate. L4 has the lowest STEP-valid rate and the highest median Chamfer Distance, al-though its source-code similarity is also the highest. The latter reflects regularity within those template families rather than lower geometric difficulty. The non-monotonic Cham-fer values likewise show that the four levels describe construction regimes, not a scalar ranking of reconstruction error. We also evaluate description-source robustness without retraining. Using the same mixed-trained LoRA adapter but replacing the test inputs with only LLM-generated comprehensive descriptions yields 99.98% Python syntax validity, 99.96% Flluma build success, 99.18% STEP-export-valid rate, 99.92% operation F1, and 87.96% mean source-code similarity on the same 10,000-sample test split. The small differences from Table 9 indicate that the adapter is not tied to the deterministic description format. This is a test-time description-source comparison, not a separately trained LLM-only baseline. 

## 7 Comparison with Existing Datasets 

Table 11 compares FllumaOne with representative geometry repositories, construction-history datasets, multimodal CAD collections, and executable-code datasets [2, 3, 5– 10, 23, 24, 31, 32]. Each scale and capability entry follows the corresponding cited paper. A released CAD file is not treated as evidence of program executability or kernel-level validation, and operation counts are given only when the cited paper explicitly reports them. The comparison separates representation from scale. Although smaller than the largest program collections, FllumaOne links its feature tree, executable Python, geometry, and learning observations to one accepted record, allowing failures to be traced across code, construction, kernel output, export, and text. 19 Table 11: Comparison with representative CAD datasets using the values reported in the cited papers. “NR” denotes a field not explicitly quantified by the cited paper; “N/A” denotes a field not applicable to geometry-only collections. 

Dataset Scale Program / history representation Reported operation scope Released or aligned modalities Reported execution / validation 

ModelNet 151,128 Final 3D assets N/A Meshes / voxels and labels N/A ShapeNet > 3M indexed Final 3D assets N/A 3D models and semantic annotations N/A ABC 1M Final B-Rep geometry without construction history N/A STEP / Parasolid, meshes, and curve / patch labels OpenCascade processing and filtering Fusion 360 (re-construction) 8,625 Human-authored sequences Sketch and extrude Sequences and target geometry Fusion 360 Gym DeepCAD 178,238 Vectorized command sequences Line, arc, circle, extrude Sequences; derived geometry B-Rep / point conversion for evaluation CADInstruct NR Natural-language-guided CAD programs NR Natural language and CAD programs NR Omni-CAD / CAD-MLLM 453,220 DeepCAD-style sequences Line, arc, circle, extrude Text, eight views, points, sequences PythonOCC; topology / enclosure metrics HistCAD 170,236 Constraint-aware executable history Sketch constraints; extrude, revolve, sweep, fillet, chamfer Sequences, native CAD, STEP, views, text Execution and editability evaluation SldprtNet 242,606 SolidWorks history as structured text 13 command types SLDPRT, STEP, seven views, text SolidWorks API round trip CADFS 450k Executable FeatureScript 15 modeling operations Programs and multimodal annotations Reconstructed and executed programs CAD-Recode 1M synthetic Executable Python programs Sketch and extrude Python and point-cloud inputs CadQuery execution Zero-to-CAD ∼1M synthetic Executable readable code Beyond sketch-extrude; count NR Sequences and CAD models Agentic execution and validation FllumaOne 100K Canonical feature tree and executable Python program 44 operation tokens; 60 feature labels Python, feature tree, training IR, STEP, points with normals, eight views, and text Flluma replay, OpenCASCADE solid validation, and STEP export 

## 8 Limitations 

FllumaOne is generated by a controlled procedural pipeline, so its distribution reflects the choices of template families, parameter ranges, level allocation, and validation constraints. This is a common trade-off in synthetic CAD and code-based CAD datasets, where scale and controllability can introduce generator-specific biases [9, 23, 24]. Although history-rich templates and irregular sketch profiles improve diversity, the dataset may still under-represent the full diversity of human CAD workflows, especially long industrial assemblies, surface-heavy consumer products, and manually authored design histories. The present release uses a local LLM only for text enrichment; it is not an autonomous geometric agent and does not perform closed-loop CAD repair, unlike recent agentic or reward-driven CAD generation pipelines [24–26]. Text descriptions may still contain awkward phrasing or fact mismatches, so deterministic and LLM-enriched text should be audited separately, following the broader need for text-CAD consistency in language-guided CAD datasets [7, 20, 32]. Finally, executable Python programs improve accessibility and repro-ducibility, but models trained on the dataset may learn the conventions of the Flluma API and program schema. Future releases should therefore include broader template families, stronger text-faithfulness checks, and additional benchmarks that measure generalization beyond the generator distribution. 20 9 Conclusion 

FllumaOne addresses a practical gap between final-shape datasets and proprietary native CAD histories by releasing an inspectable construction record with a replayable code view. The controlled generator makes 100K-scale alignment and kernel validation feasible, at the cost of inheriting its template and API distribution. The baseline confirms that the release supports a reproducible path from language to executable, geometrically comparable CAD output. The most important next step is evaluation under parameter edits and template-disjoint splits, where validity alone is no longer sufficient and preservation of construction intent becomes measurable. 

## Data and Code Availability 

The project repository is available at https://github.com/Cad-Kernel/FllumaOne-100K .It provides dataset documentation, download instructions, and the text-to-program repro-ducibility package used in this paper. The package includes scripts for data preparation, LoRA training, generation, Python evaluation, Flluma execution evaluation, and Cham-fer geometry evaluation, together with the run configuration, prompt-source comparison, and summary JSON files used for Table 9. The downloadable FllumaOne-100K archive contains the complete dataset, release manifests, schemas, split definitions, validation reports, vocabulary files, and license information. The Flluma CAD program used to execute and test generated programs is available at https://www.flluma.com .

## References 

[1] L. Zhang, B. Le, N. Akhtar, S.-K. Lam, D. Ngo, Large Language Models for Computer-Aided Design: A survey, ACM Computing Surveys 58 (9) (Feb. 2026). 

doi:10.1145/3787499 .[2] A. X. Chang, T. A. Funkhouser, L. J. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q.-X. Huang, Z. Li, S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su, J. Xiao, L. Yi, F. Yu, ShapeNet: An information-rich 3D model repository (2015). arXiv:1512.03012 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03012 

[3] S. Koch, A. Matveev, Z. Jiang, F. Williams, A. Artemov, E. Burnaev, M. Alexa, D. Zorin, D. Panozzo, ABC: A big CAD model dataset for geometric deep learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019, pp. 9601–9611. [4] A. Seff, Y. Ovadia, W. Zhou, R. P. Adams, SketchGraphs: A large-scale dataset for modeling relational geometry in Computer-Aided Design (2020). arXiv:2007.08506 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.08506 

[5] K. D. D. Willis, Y. Pu, J. Luo, H. Chu, T. Du, J. G. Lambourne, A. Solar-Lezama, W. Matusik, Fusion 360 Gallery: A dataset and environment for programmatic CAD construction from human design sequences, ACM Transactions on Graphics 40 (4) (Jul. 2021). doi:10.1145/3450626.3459818 .21 [6] R. Wu, C. Xiao, C. Zheng, DeepCAD: A deep generative network for Computer-Aided Design models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021, pp. 6772–6782. [7] C. Lv, J. Bao, CADInstruct: A multimodal dataset for natural language-guided CAD program synthesis, Computer-Aided Design 188 (2025) 103926. doi:10.1016/ j.cad.2025.103926 .[8] X. Dong, C. Li, P. Zheng, C. Han, J. Jing, H. Shen, Y. Song, Z. Yang, HistCAD: A constraint-aware parametric history-based CAD representation, dataset, and bench-mark with industrial complexity (2026). arXiv:2602.19171 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.19171 

[9] V. Pyatov, G. Bobrovskikh, S. Galochkin, N. Boldyrev, O. Voynov, A. Filip-pov, G. Ferrer, P. Wonka, E. Burnaev, CADFS: A big CAD program dataset and framework for Computer-Aided Design with Large Language Models (2026). 

arXiv:2605.01925 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.01925 

[10] Z. Wu, S. Song, A. Khosla, F. Yu, L. Zhang, X. Tang, J. Xiao, 3D ShapeNets: A deep representation for volumetric shapes, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2015, pp. 1912–1920. [11] Q. Zhou, A. Jacobson, Thingi10K: A dataset of 10,000 3D-printing models (2016). 

arXiv:1605.04797 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.04797 

[12] C. Lin, H. Liu, Q. Lin, Z. Bright, S. Tang, Y. He, M. Liu, L. Zhu, C. Le, Obja-verse++: Curated 3D object dataset with quality annotations, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, 2025, pp. 6872–6881. [13] H. Slim, X. Li, Y. Li, M. Ahmed, M. Ayman, U. Upadhyay, A. Abdelreheem, A. Prajapati, S. Pothigara, P. Wonka, M. Elhoseiny, 3DCoMPaT++: An im-proved large-scale 3D vision dataset for compositional recognition, IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 47 (12) (2025) 11431–11445. 

doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2025.3597476 .[14] P. K. Jayaraman, A. Sanghi, J. G. Lambourne, K. D. D. Willis, T. Davies, H. Shayani, N. Morris, UV-Net: Learning from boundary representations, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021, pp. 11703–11712. [15] P. K. Jayaraman, J. G. Lambourne, N. Desai, K. D. D. Willis, A. Sanghi, N. J. W. Morris, SolidGen: An autoregressive model for direct B-rep synthesis (2023). arXiv: 2203.13944 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.13944 

[16] X. Xu, J. Lambourne, P. Jayaraman, Z. Wang, K. Willis, Y. Furukawa, BrepGen: A B-rep generative diffusion model with structured latent geometry, ACM Transactions on Graphics 43 (4) (Jul. 2024). doi:10.1145/3658129 .22 [17] M. Lee, D. Zhang, C. Jambon, Y. M. Kim, BrepDiff: Single-stage B-rep diffusion model, in: Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and In-teractive Techniques Conference Conference Papers, SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’25, Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. doi:10.1145/3721238.3730698 .[18] E. Dupont, K. Cherenkova, A. Kacem, S. A. Ali, I. Arzhannikov, G. Gusev, D. Aouada, CADOps-Net: Jointly learning CAD operation types and steps from boundary-representations, in: 2022 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), IEEE, 2022, pp. 114–123. doi:10.1109/3DV57658.2022.00024 .[19] C. Zhang, A. Polette, R. Pinqui´ e, G. Carasi, H. De Charnace, J.-P. Pernot, eCAD-Net: Editable parametric CAD models reconstruction from dumb B-rep models using deep neural networks, Computer-Aided Design 178 (2025) 103806. doi:10.1016/j. cad.2024.103806 .[20] M. S. Khan, S. Sinha, T. U. Sheikh, D. Stricker, S. A. Ali, M. Z. Afzal, Text2CAD: Generating sequential CAD designs from beginner-to-expert level text prompts, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 37, Curran Associates, Inc., 2024, pp. 7552–7579. doi:10.52202/079017-0242 .[21] F. Qin, S. Lu, J. Hou, C. Wang, M. Fang, L. Liu, Drawing2CAD: Sequence-to-sequence learning for CAD generation from vector drawings, in: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, MM ’25, Association for Com-puting Machinery, 2025, pp. 10573–10582. doi:10.1145/3746027.3755782 .[22] X. Yin, X. Lu, J. Shen, J. Ni, H. Li, R. Tong, M. Tang, P. Du, RLCAD: Reinforcement learning training gym for revolution involved CAD command sequence generation, Computer-Aided Design 192 (2026) 104027. doi:10.1016/j.cad.2025.104027 .[23] D. Rukhovich, E. Dupont, D. Mallis, K. Cherenkova, A. Kacem, D. Aouada, CAD-Recode: Reverse engineering CAD code from point clouds, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2025, pp. 9801– 9811. [24] M. Ataei, F. Askari, K. R. Malekshan, P. K. Jayaraman, Zero-to-CAD: Agentic synthesis of interpretable CAD programs at million-scale without real data (2026). 

arXiv:2604.24479 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.24479 

[25] Y. Guan, X. Wang, X. Xing, J. Zhang, D. Xu, Q. Yu, CAD-Coder: Text-to-CAD generation with chain-of-thought and geometric reward, in: Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems, Vol. 38, Curran Associates, Inc., 2025, pp. 59765–59789. [26] J. Li, Q. Zhang, Q. Chen, G. Qiu, Y. Lou, X. Zhou, Towards high-fidelity CAD gener-ation via LLM-driven program generation and text-based B-rep primitive grounding (2026). arXiv:2603.11831 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.11831 

[27] M. F. Alam, F. Ahmed, GenCAD: Image-conditioned Computer-Aided Design gener-ation with transformer-based contrastive representation and diffusion priors (2025). 

arXiv:2409.16294 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.16294 

23 [28] D. Gao, D. Rozenberszki, S. Leutenegger, A. Dai, DiffCAD: Weakly-supervised prob-abilistic CAD model retrieval and alignment from an RGB image, ACM Transactions on Graphics 43 (4) (Jul. 2024). doi:10.1145/3658236 .[29] S. Wang, C. Chen, X. Le, Q. Xu, L. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Yang, CAD-GPT: Synthesising CAD construction sequence with spatial reasoning-enhanced multimodal LLMs, Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 39 (8) (2025) 7880–7888. 

doi:10.1609/aaai.v39i8.32849 .URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/32849 

[30] R. Wang, Y. Yuan, S. Sun, J. Bian, Text-to-CAD generation through infusing visual feedback in Large Language Models (2025). arXiv:2501.19054 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.19054 

[31] J. Xu, C. Wang, Z. Zhao, W. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Gao, CAD-MLLM: Unifying multimodality-conditioned CAD generation with MLLM (2025). arXiv:2411.04954 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.04954 

[32] R. Li, S. Li, Y. Mu, M. Ding, SldprtNet: A large-scale multimodal dataset for CAD generation in language-driven 3D design (2026). arXiv:2603.13098 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.13098 

[33] A. R. Colligan, T. T. Robinson, D. C. Nolan, Y. Hua, W. Cao, Hierarchical CADNet: Learning from B-Reps for machining feature recognition, Computer-Aided Design 147 (2022) 103226. doi:10.1016/j.cad.2022.103226 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0010448522000240 

[34] S. Zhang, Z. Guan, H. Jiang, X. Wang, P. Tan, BrepMFR: Enhancing ma-chining feature recognition in B-rep models through deep learning and do-main adaptation, Computer Aided Geometric Design 111 (2024) 102318. 

doi:10.1016/j.cagd.2024.102318 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0167839624000529 

[35] Qwen Team, A. Yang, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Li, D. Liu, F. Huang, H. Wei, H. Lin, J. Yang, J. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yang, J. Zhou, J. Lin, K. Dang, K. Lu, K. Bao, K. Yang, L. Yu, M. Li, M. Xue, P. Zhang, Q. Zhu, R. Men, R. Lin, T. Li, T. Tang, T. Xia, X. Ren, X. Ren, Y. Fan, Y. Su, Y. Zhang, Y. Wan, Y. Liu, Z. Cui, Z. Zhang, Z. Qiu, Qwen2.5 technical report (2025). arXiv: 2412.15115 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 

24